This is Aileen Richin interviewing Rikson Richin for the Swigga 25th anniversary Cardiff
Carnival Heritage Project. It is the 13th of November and we are in Penelan in Cardiff.
Rikson, please could you spell your name for the recording?
My first name?
Yes.
Rikson, spell R-I-X-O-N.
What can you remember about the first get involved in the Cardiff Carnival?
What can I remember about first getting involved? I think it was 2003. I got involved because
my wife had been involved for quite a few years prior to that and I think probably a
couple of years prior to that she'd suggested I get involved but I wasn't so sure because
I'd never really done anything like that before. But I was quite interested in the idea of
doing steel pans. So the first year I did it I went, I did I think it was classes once
a week for a few weeks or a couple of times a week to do steel pans and then actually
in the carnival I was part of the steel pan section. So that's I guess that's my first
memory. Although my first I guess my first memory is watching it.
What is it about the carnival that keeps you being involved?
It's just fun. On the day it's good fun. I must admit I don't do an awful lot. I don't
get involved too much prior to the actual event. My wife does all the costume making
so I pretty much just turn up on the day. It's just good fun. It's very different. It's
a different thing for me to do. I guess I'm quite a shy person generally so it's not something
I would normally do. But it's kind of it's an alter ego for me. So once a year I get
to do something that's quite different for me.
How many carnival have you been involved in?
I know this because I've made a record. So I've been in seven. First one was in 2003.
Then there was a gap and I've been in every year since 2009.
What is the gap?
I don't know. I think there was a lot whilst I really enjoyed the steel pan there was a
lot of involvement. At that time I guess I wasn't that keen to do a section involving
around. But then when you got bigger and you went in the carnival on your own I thought
I'd join in with you. That's what kind of got me back involved really.
How are the carnivals different?
I guess they're different in different ways. Obviously there's a different theme every
year. So that changes it. The routes have changed quite a lot. The venues have changed.
The route probably changes the experience of doing it quite a lot I think. There's been
bits added every year. There's a static section. You do a lot of walking but then there's lots
of static bits as well. But for me I guess what makes it different every year is the
costumes and the outfits.
What was your experience of the carnival camp?
Experience of the carnival camp? I must admit I haven't been that involved in the last few
years although when I first started I did used to go down. But it's just difficult for
me now to really get involved in the carnival camp. But my experience of it is a positive
one. People are very friendly. It's quite good fun. It's just difficult to find the
time to do it.
Can you remember music and dance being involved?
I think the music and the dance are the most important things for me. I like dancing. There's
a kind of freedom that you get in being part of the carnival that I think is difficult
to replicate elsewhere. I like the fact that you can put an outfit on. I wear lots of masks
so I can hide myself a little bit so I can create a character and maybe be a bit more
like I'd like to be. But I guess I find it more difficult in everyday life. I like being
able to dance around quite a lot.
Obviously you remember music as you said in the steel pans earlier. What was your most
memorable carnival incident?
I don't know really. I'm not sure if I've got a single incident. I guess I'm probably
in it every year because I enjoy it every year. For me it's probably the outfits. On
the day it makes a big difference who you've got in terms of the band. Which band you've
got in front of you and which band behind you. So that makes a big difference in terms
of how much fun it is. But yeah I think it's probably the outfits. Just kind of dancing
around and mucking around with people. So I don't think it's a single moment. It's
lots of different moments.
What do you recall about taking part in the parade?
What do I enjoy?
What do you recall?
What do I recall?
I probably recall the outfits more than anything. I recall getting very wet on occasion. But
that just being part of the fun.
So what is your favourite outfit?
My favourite outfit was probably the 2010 Cosmic Tech Couch. It was a Terminator outfit.
It was a cross between a bit like Terminator from the movie Terminator. It was a bit of
a Roman skirt. So that was probably my favourite outfit. But I've had lots of different outfits
across the years. Last year was the Hellrealm Demon which was a character from the Buddhist
Wheel of Life, Tanker. I've been Davy Jones from a kind of Davy Jones like character.
I've been a Blue Devil, a Lightning Man, Dragon with you. So every year I've got a different
mask and all my masks are on the wall of the house. So everyone that comes into the house
every time they go up and down the stairs they can see the masks.
What is your favourite part of Carnival involvement?
Probably just the very friendly atmosphere that you get.
And what elements do you find least enjoyable?
Least enjoyable? I don't know if there is a least enjoyable part. Actually usually, even
though you're tired at the end, because you've been dancing around and engaging with the
crowd. I do a lot of dancing and mucking around and engaging with the crowd quite a lot. So
when it's over, that's probably the least engaging part of it really. When it's over,
when it ends.
How do you feel the crowd reacted?
I think mostly good. I think some people were a bit shy and a bit unsure about how to react.
I wear my masks because I like to interact with the crowd quite a lot. I've never had
a negative reaction. People don't necessarily know how to react, but people are clearly
having a good time. So I think it's a positive one. It always surprised me how many people
turn out actually to watch it.
What is that?
I don't know. I'm just surprised. There's always so many people out on the route watching
it, regardless of the weather. It's always jam-packed.
What changes have you seen in the Carnival over time?
I guess the probably biggest changes have been the routes. But I guess also it used
to be part of the big weekend. It's probably a shame that it's not associated with that
anymore to some degree because I think it lost something a little bit.
Whilst it's big enough as an event to stand on its own, I think it's a shame that the
council decided to pull funding from it and it lost its connection with that because I
think they gave it a slightly larger stage for it really.
What do you think the value of Carnival is?
Probably that it brings people together.
What is that?
Not just the participants, but there is a real sense of togetherness on the day. You
never see any trouble or problems. People seem to be enjoying themselves and there's
a very relaxed atmosphere.
After the Carnival experience is over, how do you feel?
A mixture of exhilarated because you've been dancing around and often in the rain.
Tired, but then usually a bit disappointed that it's all over.
Thank you.
You're welcome.